---
title: Ordinary yet original

description: Why I'm choosing to spend the next few months living with my Mom instead of traveling the world.

quote: |
  Be regular and orderly in your life, so that you may be violent and original in your work.
  <br /> - Gustave Flaubert

draft: true
---

I’m lucky enough to work remotely. So I can work from anywhere in the world. Yet, for the past two months, I've chosen to be in Minneapolis, where my parents live. I came back for the holidays and had thought about leaving right after to escape the cold winter and start the new year in Mexico. But instead, I stayed here.

I'll admit, I spent a day searching reddit for hipster neighborhoods in Mexico City and looking at flights and airbnbs. But it was doing that that made me think: what the hell am I doing? I don't care to be traveling right now, I have a lot in the backlog of my mind and would much rather spend my days at home writing and coding.

My focus isn't travel, but work. I'd rather live like a king in Latin America than spend $3k in rent/month in San Francisco; but, if I'm true to myself, I'd rather lock myself up at home for a few months, if that means living without distractions.

[[ TODO ]]
- wanted to write article about how original work = ordinary life
- can't be traveling the world, staying at home has less distractions
- even when you travel world, your mostly working
- what you're looking for is a community
- i travel because it's cheap and i get to meet people
- but then i feel the pressure of having to explore and sight see
- when all i really want to do is work with talented people
- but because my project is at an early stage that's hard to do
- since it's just me, by myself exploring an idea
- part of why i don't think i can finish this article now is because my understanding of this feeling is still unfinished/unresolved
- and also went in order directions: [depression] [living at home]
- [family expectations]
- so i think it would be cool to actually use resoflect to parse out these thoughts better
- and to build collab onto it for feedback, etc

// A
I used to think I could work months on end and not care about socializing. But the limit now seems to be two to three months. I think i'ts because I'm more conscious of time now and how I spend it. and because more expectations.
// B
Ideally, I'd have the fortitude to work like a hermit years on end till my project gains traction. But when there's no meaningful progress for weeks on end, and I don't see the horizon near, the machismo starts to fade quickly.

So it's important to play the long game. At least for me, since I like to take my time and make things my own way. When things in my work aren't going well it's important to have other things in life to give life meaning.

So that's why I'm conflicted with staying at home versus traveling. While traveling I can cheaply live in the center of where things are happening. The coffee shop is a few blocks away, and so is the mall and beer garden.

But my most productive times were living at home, not traveling. There special thing about working from home is that it's boring. It's hard to arrive in a new place and spend all days in a coffee shop, you feel like you need to go out exploring. Whereas at home, it's understood to be boring.

I don't mean this to be a discussion about how many hours one works or any of that. Just that most unhappiness one feels is due to unresolved value conflicts. We're one place, and we feel we'd prefer somewhere else. Then we get somewhere else and we wish we could go back to elsewhere.

There's only so many ideas you can hold in your head at once, and so I want to save that space for thinking about what matters.

(when i travel i feed my ego, when i work I feed my soul.)

// live in your minds


// TODO

outer world feels we're doing and what you yourself find meaningful, and the sort of work/time that'll get you there
care about outer appearances when you're ready to cash in on them


outer reality hasn't manifested yet
and can't compltely control schedule
pressures to living way we want to live
Some of my most productive days were at home.

// going out and living life and locking yourself up to process it.



// TODO 

But living a boring life is difficult. We're doing what we want to be doing, yet at the same time feel like we're not living life as one should.



// TODO

//syet I'm spending all this time researching for it;

What's the point in living in Medellin if I'm going to be doing the same thing I could be doing at home? Sitting in my laptop all day.

Sure, I can be somewhere and meet people, but most of those relationships are transient, just like traveling is.

Most important thing isn't where you're at, it's community.
When I consider reasons I want to travel, most important one is community. culture is so important and i didn't feel like I had it in Latin America. i was able to live like a king, but i my social like felt poor. i wasn't around the people I wanted to be with.
Novelty wears off; worse, it gets tiring.
//


//
when your main priority is work the last thing you want is novelty. you want all the surprises to come from your mind, not from reality. 
//

//

there not enjoying their life as much as you think
they're enjoying the image of it.
it's hard to enjoy something if you don't feel like the pieces fit.
you can enjoy a day or two sure, but you don't feel like you can stay there.
you want to be in a place that's calling for you.
//

// TODo

I used to be embarrassed about saying I'm living with my Mom. But now that I can work from anywhere, it doesn't bother me as much. It seems that what matters in appearances is the display of freedom, and it's just easier to show you have it as you travel through Asia and Latin America. Who's going to believe I choose to stay at home and work all day? But before Minneapolis I spent five months traveling Colombia, so it feels as if I've bought a few months of peace of mind.

Though even if I could subvert caring about appearances, I don't think living at home with one's parents is healthy. At least not in my situation. My mom lives 45 mins away from downtown, and the closest coffee shop is 6 minutes away driving. So I don't leave the house or socialize much while here. For a few months to focus on work, that's exactly what I'm looking for, but anything longer can get depressing.



If I had to choose between traveling or living in my head, I'd pick living in my head 3 months out of the year. lol.

// be somewhere where i can socialize and meet up


// TODO
// get to *slowly* see different cultures 
// long term travel, transient friendships

Above all, I live in my head. So every now and then I have to make sure I'm in a place that lets me return there.
