---
title: Reso

draft: true
---

- PassITon


If you have to pick one app for someone to see too get an idea of who you are, which one would you pick?
For many it might be Twitter.
For some it's email.
where-ever my notes are.

what stops me from sharing it?
context - needs to be in context of other notes. not just on off ramblings. but evolution of my being. see me as close to the way I see me.
subscriptions - not timelines/feeds where everything you post gets 

investment
building on top of information
collaborating 


From PassItOn to Studbits to Resoflect
started v1 in Oct Vue + Adonis 
in Feb switched it to v2 Vue+Express 
then to react 
then again in react native 
then again cause i didn't like learning version
then stop here, changed to clojure 

(why not fundraise or be more effective)
notice easier to workout when gym is nearby
same with funding
isolated, without a car in minneapolis
figured i'd build it myself 
and in general, that's my tendency.
so environment for personality sent me to where I am.

In 2013, around the time I graduate high school, I had an idea for "PassITon," a platform where people share their passion. Facebook and Instagram existed at the time, but I wanted a platform specficially tailored fo where people could genuinely express themselves online. 

Even then, something inside me told me I wasn't genuinely expressing myself online.

I called it "PassItOn." Man was young and naive. Aside from not knowing the least bit of what it would take to start a business, let alone a social netowok, it took long for me to realize that existing platforms already allow you to share anything you want, and thay people choose to share whay they share.

I randomly remembered "PassItOn" a month ago. 
I'll explain why in a second. But first let me ask you: do you feel that what goes on in platforms like Facebook -- is that really *you*? Is news, politics, sports, resumes, and prank videos -- is that all we have to share online? Is that what really drives people? 

The answer for me has always been painfully clear: 
I am more than that. I am more than a stupid 
tweet Trump posted. I am more than a triple double 
that LeBron scored. I am more than the photos I upload on Instagram and defintely more than the list of connections and skills that I list on Linken. That's not to say that I don't take part in any of those things but they are not at the root of how I would privately define myself.

Not the things that are quick to catch my attention 
or to excite anger in me. Not that things that I do for a grade or money or any external motivation. I am, or at leadt ill become, what I consciously choose to spend my own time on. 

At least for me, the parts of me that are really me, 
I've always kept private. Notes on books I've read. Thoughts I've written down. Reflections on dreams, wishes, and struggles. Is that something that we should share? Why aren't people sharing more of that? Why haven't I? 

Finding meaning and purpose in life is the hardest thing 
you'll have to accomplish. The second hardest is barevrly and genuinely sharing your quest and mission before you do. 

So this post is a start. I'll be writing more on Medium. Posting all my notes on Studbits. And all my thoughts on Twitter.

Why do I feel so strongly about this? 
I'm working on an application that helps you learn and share your notes. And thibking back on my lofty childhood dream of startijf "PassIton" i 've realized that, as much as i love books, this is much greater than book notes. Its the things thay we write down privatelt that truly define us. But if theres on thing ive learn coding: not everytji g has to be private, and sharing things allows you to grow and expand and contribute and build o. Top of whay already exists. 
