---
title: Code === Art

draft: true
---

Code === Art 
What has surprised me most since I started to learn programming, is that I’d actually enjoy the act of doing it. Even more, I’ve grown to see an inherent beauty tied to doing it well. So much so, that it’s got me asking: can coding be considered art?  

When you ask someone, “What is art,” the typical answers are, “art is useless” or “art is done for its own sake.” Yet those answers can’t deny the fact that when we create, and try to do it well, we feel like we’re making art. It’s more than  the intention that I’m describing but the qualia of creating and consuming. The feeling that something was done thoughtfully, and elegantly. Skillfully. These are all works we use to describe art. 

These sort of philosophical, art related questions are hard to take seriously. If we explore the question directly, we tread down the path of saying, “anything is art.” And that’s like being happy to reach a dead end. To say that everything can fit in a label is to render the label itself meaningless.   

In comparing code to art, my goal isn’t to make the label meaningless, but to find the meaning in the label. When we call something art, what exactly are we implying? Likewise, what are we implying when we don’t? 

There’s the canonical answers. Like art is useless, and done for its own sake. Or art takes skill, and is anything that’s done well. But these answers don’t dig far enough into the core of the question: what makes art, art? 

Even as a programmer, I consider this question important, because what we call art we bestow with an element of wonder, care, and prestige. 20th Century Silicon Valley, for example, may have prestige, but it doesn’t have the wonder of 1920 Florence. Art has a foothold, not only the perception of a craft, but in the perception a craftsman has of themselves and their work. So, the extent to which art can be self scripted, that’s something worth exploring. 


Layers 

The first factor that makes art hard to discuss productively, is the broad and varied usage of the word.

It can’t be the subjective nature of it. Colors are subjective, yet we seem to agree on what’s green versus yellow. But, unlike a color, art doesn’t refer to a discrete thing. Though its commonly used a noun, it’s more productive to see it as an adjective that describes a certain flair something has. 

What exactly that “something” is is complicated. Our labeling of art can have many layers. Theres the craftsman, the process of creating, and the creation itself. And even the creation can have layers. Architects, for example, have blueprints and buildings, and programmers have code and applications. 

What further complicates the discussion is that these different layers are used almost interchangeably. Most cases this is fine. If we call a painting art, than we can infer the painter is an artist; and vice versa. Though it gets tricker with some crafts. Blueprints may not be called art, but the painting they product may well be. Though the architect himself may see the production of the blueprints as an art, and the building only the byproduct of its construction. 




—-


v1

. 

The underpinnings of art 

The most pleasant surprise I’ve had since I decided to learn programming is discovering that I actually enjoy the act of doing it. Even more, I’ve grown to see an inherent beauty tied to coding well. So much so, that it’s got me asking: can coding be considered art?  
 
I never tried exploring this question before because in the back of my mind I imagine I’ll tread down the path of saying “anything is art.” And that’s like being happy to reach a dead end--if anything can fit in a label then the label itself is meaningless. My goal isn’t to make the label meaningless, but to find the meaning in the label. 
 
When we call something art, what exactly are we implying? There are canonical answers to this question, i.e., art is useless and done for its own sake. But they fail to capture the exemptions. 
 
 
Even as a programmer, I consider this question important, because what we call art we bestow with an element of wonder and prestige. 20th century Silicon Valley, for example, may ave prestige, but it doesn’t have the same wonder as 15th century Florence. The gut response is to say that there hasn’t been any artists over there—just venture capitalist and programmers. But that’s not true. Steve Jobs was an artists. So why was he special? And why is what they do, as a whole, not perceived as art? 


Every field there’s an intersection between the field and art

Memory artist vs student (former is learnning useless infomration and adding meaning to it)    








Art has become less valuable in society. Why is that - and what’s going to come next? 

Art has a foothold, not only the perception of a craft, but in the perception a craftsman has of themselves and their work. So, the extent to which art can be self scripted into a craft, that’s something worth exploring. 
 
 
—- 
Which is why I want to tread lightly here as I explore whether code is art. I know I could tell you about all the empathy and creativity required to write a program elegantly. I could even give you reasons for why having an aesthetic appreciation for code matters. But we’d still be left with the same hang-off point: code, outside of the fact that it pays well to write it, is not something I can peacock in any fashion. It’s not something I’d hang on my wall, nor would I recite it at a concert. Code just isn’t appreciated the same way typical art is.
 
Well, maybe not in regards to the surface-level impressions. Like when I we see a painting and think, “Wow, that’s beautiful.” Though I never mean beautiful like attractive. But beautiful like appealing. Intriguing even. I start to ask: “What it’d take to create that?” And then another thought bubbles up in my mind: “Wow, that’s really well done.”    
It’s this thought process that occurs while I write code, except it’s inverted: I 
see something as being done well and the result looks beautiful; like art.
 
So that’s the proposition I’d like to explore: not “anything is art” but “anything done well is art.” How far can that get us?
 
 
Layers 

The first factor that makes art hard to discuss productively, is the broad and varied usage of the word.

It can’t be the subjective nature of it. Colors are subjective, yet we seem to agree on what’s green versus yellow. But, unlike a color, art doesn’t refer to a discrete thing. Though its commonly used a noun, it’s more productive to see it as an adjective that describes a certain flair something has. 

What exactly that “something” is is complicated. Our labeling of art can have many layers. Theres the craftsman, the process of creating, and the creation itself. And even the creation can have layers. Architects, for example, have blueprints and buildings, and programmers have code and applications. 

What further complicates the discussion is that these different layers are used almost interchangeably. Most cases this is fine. If we call a painting art, than we can infer the painter is an artist; and vice versa. Though it gets tricker with some crafts. Blueprints may not be called art, but the painting they product may well be. Though the architect himself may see the production of the blueprints as an art, and the building only the byproduct of its construction. 

If the product is art, then the process is art.
Has ti be judged in it’s own terms. Base don the merits of waht makes it great or exist at all,.
 
 
Useful
If anything done well is art, then why are the product of some crafts more art than others? Well, when something is done well, but has outward utility, we have another word for it: useful.
 
There does seem to be merit in differentiating between something between something-made-to-be-sensed and something-made-to-be-used. I’ve seen some apps that have been really well designed but I’ve disliked using them. I, for one, rarely use  apps that are too well designed. It’s as if past a certain point the aesthetics take away from functionality. Though I also find no pleasure in using an app that’s badly designed. What’s art and what’s useful seems to fall on a spectrum.
 
Take the two most popular forms of art: painting and music. Which do you think is more of an art? Like me, you’d likely say painting. Given the art-usefulness spectrum, that makes sense: a song is more useful to me than a painting; I can take it with me anywhere I go and use to put myself in a specific mood, whereas a painting just sits idly on my wall, only affecting my mood in the rare moments I remember to stop and look at it. 
 
We can generalize this into a rule: something useful that you appreciate is not as much art as something useless that you appreciate.
 
But what about crafts like coding—why aren’t they considered art at all? It can’t be a matter of usefulness, otherwise some apps would definitely be considered art. When I think about what I value in a song versus a web app, I notice I value a song for how it makes me feel, whereas a web app for the problem it solves. So it looks like it’s not some upper limit in usefulness that exempts a craft from being art, but a binary check as to whether it can be considered something else. Coding doesn’t need to be art to have a label, it stands on its own as useful.
 
It looks like we can now draw the art-usefulness spectrum: on the far left is art that’s relatively useless (i.e. painting), on the far right is art that’s relatively useful (i.e. coding), and along the middle is art that’s liminal in manifestation of usefulness (i.e. music). 
 
There’s still lots of exceptions running off in my mind. The drawing doesn’t feel complete. What’s missing?
 
Replicable
 
There’s another category of arts we have yet to explore: entertainment. So it looks like what’s art and what’s not isn’t best modeled by a line, but by a grid. 
 
My first thought was to factor entertainment into the grid itself. My working definition for entertainment being that which is only useful as a shared human experience. But that too, is what makes art art. So there has to be some other quality that makes them different from one another.
 
A non-typical example to consider is boxing—can it be considered an art? On the surface, it’s two humans pounding each others faces. But boxing, like painting and coding, takes skill to be done well. So is there an exemption to “art is something done well” when it comes to violence? It doesn’t seem to be so, since there’s also the “martial arts,” like jiu-jitsu—and they literally have art in their name. What made them deserve its label?  And why was boxing excluded from having it? 
 
One explanation is that boxing is more artificial. There’s more rules that restrict how you’re able to hit. A boxers’ referee would say “hey!, no kicking or grappling”, whereas a martial arts’ referee would say, “please, just don’t kill each other!” A boxer restrains their range of movement for entertainment purposes, the martial artists does so for fear of being imprisoned. Their craft is something they wield rather than use. To the extent that’s true, they learned their martial art for its own sake. For the art of it.
 
Comedians face a similar conundrum as marital artists. They can’t just go around cracking jokes at people. There’s a time and a place for it.  But even then. A joke is always at the expense of specific people. So I’d imagine the funniest jokes can’t be said in all places. In which case, they mostly lay dormant, like a painting. 
 
I’m noticing a pattern: the extent to which something is entertainment rather than art, is the extent to which the experience can be replicated.
 
This makes sense considering that science is the opposite of art. If true science is what can be repeatedly tested, then true art is what can only happen once. Like the Mona Lisa, there can only be one of her and she’s sitting in the Louvre Museum in Paris. Any attempt at replicating wouldn’t add to her essence, because she’s not here for science or entertainment, she’s art. 
 
That must be why a painting is pure art. Aside from being useless, it’s the hardest craft to replicate. A painter will only paint a piece a specific way once. The only way to attain the original work, is to physically steal it.
 
In other crafts, self imposed originality rights aren’t as strong. A good joke, for example, can be told by anyone with the wit to tell it. Hence why comedians bicker when another comedian steals their material. But what makes comedy, comedy isn’t just the material—but the crowd. The best comedians build up a story to the point where they can make the most opposing crowds cheer with laugher. A comedian that’d be hard to copy is one who could tell Jewish jokes at Synagogue. 
 
I imagine it’d take existing camaraderie to pull that off. That’s likely why the best jokes are inside jokes between friends. You try to tell them to someone and the joke falls flat—the background context isn’t there.  But to the extent that someone would be able to tell it well anyway, that’s a skill that’s hard to replicate, that’s an art.
 
The most useful thing that’s hard to replicate, we haven’t even discussed yet. It’s easier to spot in the technology field. For example: what’s more of an art, Facebook or Google? I’d instinctively say Facebook. What makes Facebook Facebook Mark Zuckerberg can’t even replicate himself: being at the right place and time in the dot-com era to have a chance at growing the most valuable network in the world. Whereas I’d bet Larry Page and Sergey Brin would be able to start a Google competitor, even today. A better search experience would be hard to create, sure, but it wouldn’t be as hard as getting 2.32 billion people to add their identity to a single platform again.
 
We can start extrapolating this out into the shape of our art-useful-replicable grid: in one corner is art that’s relatively useless and hard to replicate (i.e. paintings), in another is art that’s relatively useful and hard to replicate (i.e. networks), and along the middle is art that is liminal in its manifestation of usefulness and replicability (i.e. comedy).
 
This picture now looks more complete. But there’s still a corner of it left unexplored: if the best art is useless and unreplicable, why the hell do we value it anyway? 
 
Signaling
 
Art is “useless” not in the sense that it isn’t valuable, but that it’s not valuable outside of our shared, subjective experience. 
 
That has a valuable in of itself: status. Art is a display of fitness.
 
We value art in of itself, yes, but even the act of doing that is a signal. You’re partiipating fully in a subjective experience without regard to the otuside world. Only the most privleged members of society get to do that. And only the most creative and emphatic do it well.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(give bizarrer examples - if just useless and unreplicaple, then lying in the beach would be art.)
 
 
But pure arts like painting do have a utility, just not one that everyone has the mind to appreciate. Give someone struggling to pay rent a Mona Lisa and I assure you the first thing they do won’t be hanging it. 
 
(but I’d be better to think that they’re two different ways of looking at what we apprecaite in the work of other human beings.)
(Privelgeed form of usefuleness)
Utility of art. Making the assumption that art doesn’t serve a purpose, it does: it’s a signaling mechanism. In a world where people are struggling to feed themselves and provides shelter. Lif or death concerns. This guys over there mkaing art!
 
—-
—comedy, dancing, etc—seem to have some practical use for the performer, even if for the spectators the entertainment itself is not directly useful. In evolutionary terms, we can say they help attract (or in some cases, defend) mates, and serve as strong signaling mechanisms.
(useful for spectators because people find value in partaking in the activity together)
 
— 
A possible exception that comes to mind is architecture. Throughout history buildings have been praised for both their beauty and function. But whether there’s any distinction between these two words seems to fall upon what purpose the building serves. A pyramids, for example, is built to house the tombs of a country’s Pharaoh; whereas a High-rise is built to house thousands of a city’s inhabits. The former being an Egyptian status symbol, or art; and the latter being a solution to Mantahants housing criss, or useful.
 
So the art-usefulness spectrum is only fragmented if the craft itself can be fragmented. But we usually end up using new words to pick apart differences in utility. You don’t paint a comic, for example, you draw one. A comic, just like a web app, draws a balance beauty and utility. You never see a comic that’s too well drawn because that’d take away from its usefulness: being funny.
 
 
Where this gets even more interesting is in new mediums we’re just started making distinctions for. 
With regards to apps, for example, there’s status as a service apps like social media.
(my bet is that the new wave of waves will blur this further - they’ll be useful status symbols)
The same spectrum dexists for coding and web apps. Consumer apps are seen as more art than business apps. Becuase they’re used as ways to signal to other mates and orient our status in the world, whereas other apps solve useful problems, and some blur the lines.
 
 
Onlooker 
 
Size and scope of a building and the duality of it - Has to be seen to be apprecaited vs lived in or used. 
Fullfills needs lower in Maslows hiearchy.
 
have more wiggle room to combine both: aesthetics and utility.
 
 they’re paid well for their ability to combine to design an aesthetic building that stays intact. 
(beautiful for the purpose it serves. For it;’s simplicity. Perhaps for a on off mark that makes it unique ewihtout detracitng from it’s value. So it’s not that im juding what’s valuable or not. I’m trying to get to the bottom of our usage of certain words, bnecause those words shape our outlook.
Beautify has no explaination. Doesn’t serve any purpose. I dpn’t think that’s the case.
Architecture- stare at a highrise from far away. Don’t just sit and and stare at a web app. That is, unless your a web developer.
 
(Taking this step further: female beauty is useful.
 
 
 
 
(just make it entertainment—-useful-refplicable grid, bdecause something that’s boring and useless, ceases to exist)
Drug
 
What’s something that’s useful, entertaining, and statusy? The only answer that came to mind felt like a gestalt: drugs. It can’t be a coincidence that it’s with the same language that we describe social media.
 
Except: drugs denominate the lower and higher classes. (lower, especially). Since things that are too addictive, become unhealthy. /Perhaps thats whats happening with FB/
 
/How are drugs art? — might be a strecht of thought/
 
 
Layers of Art 
 
There’s two things I’ve been usingin junction - coding and web apps. Indeed, there’s two layers of apprecation
 
The art-usefulness distinction is blurred, however, when you start to appreciate what went into making the things you find outward use for. Before I started programming, I used to visit websites without a thought as to what went in to make them. But now I can’t visit a website without marveling at its design. The same happened with writing. I can’t read a book now without picking apart the author’s choices. Regardless of what value I’m deriving from something, I can’t help but appreciate it as as art as I think about what went into making it.
 
There is, however, one subject I’ve never been able to consider as art: math. Not because I don’t find it beautiful. It’s just that I read complex math equations as I do chinese sentences. I lack the background knowledge to appreciate the beauty in that language, so I kind of just have to believe all my smart friends when they say math is beautiful.
 
Though that doesn’t seem much different than the way one becomes acquainted with any art. I found the Mona Lisa beautiful way before I started considering what made a painting beautiful. Until you become familiar with a subject, you kind of just have to accept the opinions of those who appear more sophisticated than you in the matter, especially when those opinions are esteemed by millions of other people.
 
But I don’t think that’s a bad thing. Code has its own qualities that only other coders, by nature of speaking the language and being in the field, can appreciate. 
Making public appreciation the defining characteristic of art might make sense for the general public, but from a creators perspective, it paints a dull picture of what art actually is.
 
 
 
 
 
—
 
That’s not to say that some arts aren’t valuable, just that the word “useful” seems to be preserved for things that have an outward utility outside our shared experience.
 
(I’ll note here that when I say useful, I’m not using it to differentiate whether something is valuable or not, but to differentiate whether something ) 
--
So from a broad view “anything done well is art” and so yes, coding is an art. But if we wanted to get technical, we’d say “anything done well to the extent that it has no outward utility is art,” and so yeah coding is an art but also not really.
 
So entertainment and art are both something that is only useful as a shared human experience, but unlike entertainment, art is something that is hard to replicate; pure art being that which can only happen once.
 
 
Individual creativity > collective production 
Art vs craft - artisan 
Quilts, ceramics, wood carvings - try to preserve a tradition.
 
 
 

This question fascinates me because as a programmer, we sayapps aren’t art. That we should move fast, iterate quickly, talk to customers.
The way we’re building startups aren’t in line with art.
 
But the product, brand, founder that we admire most, it’s him that we’ve called an artist.
 
There are some things that we’ve called art, and people that we’ve called artists, that by our standard conceptualization of art perhaps shouldn’t have been. So, what are the minimum qualities something must have to be considered art?
 
