---
title: the curious thing about advice

draft: true
---

Funny thing about advice is you only listen to advice you soemwhat already agree with.. 

To what extent does anyone ever really take advice?

// TODO 
you're not just trying to get them to pick between two ideas, you're trying to change their world view / filp the entire thing on its head.

only time i took advice that went against my beliefs was when my beliefs changed. That's why I don't think it was in conversations, it's hard to get that level of nuance. It was by reading essays and books.

other than that, you're only really taking advice that aligns with your beliefs. you might take advice that helps you step a few feet forwwrad, but not one that compltely makes you change direction. 

also, when you believe in someone and believ ethey alginw ith you you are, you foillow their advce. , and I wasn't exposed by those kind of mentors, 




// 
Maybe I'm more stubborn than other people

I'm starting to wonder whether taking advice is useful.
whether anyone listens to someones advice
in the sense that ask for advice if we're willing to entertain the opossing view
most of the time we just want to confirm existing view
not asking for direction (north) but a strategy (which roads?)
or motivation (ok, they believe it too)



--
like when people say they took your advice but really
they just listend to what they wanted and did that
(i.e. moises following his instincts)


i.e. learn to program, already felt it was important, just didn't believe i could be capable of doing it; or that i would like it as much as i do.

people act the way they want to act. not looking for advice but confirmation of beliefs.

rarely are we trying to choose between two options. most of the times we're just trying to find more reasons to choose one over the other.
(sometimes because we know we're not doing the most practical thing, but other times because the most pracitcal decision now isn't necessarily the most benefitical long term decisions - these things are hard to pick apart because they only manifest in the furtuer, one of many realities you don't see,  but thebest example you have of this is VC funding.)

but what i didn't realzie is that some times you follow advice of people who you already respect and admire. so they have the ability to sway your thinking.
this happened to me with studbits. i focused on learning. i wanted to find more practical approach to idea. but it wasn't what i wanted to build.
and the app showed it. 
(also partly lacking ability, again these things are hard to pick apart, but every feature in an app is so improtant, and so it was a mistake to make the center of the app something it wasn't just because it'd be easier to pitch angle. i don't think you can recover fromthese things as easy, and that's why many statups arent helpign people share menaiungful info.)



anyway, buildiong a thir dtime, same vision as first product, but with more experience. more programming prowess. we'll see what happens.****
